Questionnaire Guidance1.CommunicationThis covers all types of communication between at least two people who may be present face to face or connected by virtual technologies. The methods used to communicate with and by people with disabilities should be treated the same as all other forms of communication.  This includes Sign Language, hand signals for people with hearing loss or speech impairment, using the telephone or technology to enable virtual communications and delivering presentations, training and development sessions or lectures. Other kinds of communication for people with disabilities, e.g., Braille and Blissymbols, are covered under Written or Electronic Communication.The skills of the communicator are under consideration, not the language or medium used. For example, when another language is being used, account should be taken of the fluency of both the communicator and the audience when deciding how to score the evidence.It is essential to always take the audience into account when scoring evidence to determine the difficulty or complexity of the communication process.Therefore, account should be taken of the recipient's level of understanding. Generally, communication is a less skillful and demanding process when communicator and recipient share a similar level of knowledge and understanding of the subject matter.Oral CommunicationCovers oral communication in both informal and formal situations. This may include conveying basic factual information clearly and accurately; conveying information in the most appropriate format; and explaining complex or detailed specialist information.Select the questions and responses which, in their entirety, best reflect the evidence.LINEAR Response Table:For each question, which response best describes the role requirements?:› A essential - frequently used› B essential - occasionally used› C not relevantA maximum of 80 points is allocated between the sub-elements.Question 1. Is the role holder required to understand and convey: straightforward information in a clear and accurate manner?Guidance: Describes the basic level of oral communication required where the role holder is required to use and understand straightforward information clearly and accurately.  This basic level of oral communication will probably be required for most roles.  However, it is possible that a role holder will not be required to undertake this level of communication all the time. If this type of communication is a common occurrence the evidence should be scored A. For all other situations the evidence should be scored B.  Examples:1. Giving directions to visitors2. Handling telephone enquiries where the information is of a routine/standard nature3. Replying to requests for information that requires no interpretation of terminology or context4. Recording and passing on data/information/messagesQuestion 2. Is the role holder required to understand and convey: information which needs careful explanation or interpretation to help others understand, taking into account what to communicate and how best to convey the information to others?Guidance: Describes those roles where the role holder is required to clarify matters of a non-routine nature.  The role holder will be required to use language over and above that found in everyday conversation and will be expected to place the contents in a logical order and choose an appropriate method of delivery to ensure understanding.Examples:1. Understanding and explaining non-standard procedures, regulations or course entry requirements.2. Explaining to students or members of staff how to operate equipment or conduct an experimental technique or method of analysis.3. Reasoning, persuading and negotiating with colleagues to understand and adopt or modify a viewpoint.4. Presenting a paper about the development / discovery of a new idea or concept at a conference / network of colleagues in the same field.5. Providing feedback or resolving conflicts where sensitivity, tact and diplomacy are required.6. Explaining a report on the cost or operational implications of a decision where arguments are presented to engage the audience.7. Giving an introductory lecture to students who have familiarity with basic principles of the topic.8. Conducting an interview as part of a staff or student recruitment exercise to draw out information and make decisions.9. Using various forms of media and technology to conduct virtual meetings or coaching sessions with members of staff working at a different location or from homeQuestion 3. Is the role holder required to understand and convey: complex conceptual ideas or complex information which may be highly detailed, technical or specialist?Guidance: Refers to those roles where the role holder is required to understand and convey communication of a complex or conceptual nature which typically would require considerable skill to ensure it was understood by non-specialists.Examples:1. Providing a detailed explanation, by breaking information and facts down into logical steps and enabling the audience to learn and understand how a bespoke system or a set of legal regulations operates, and their implications.2. Explaining the results of an original or ground-breaking research project to students or nonspecialists in the subject area (for example in a lecture or conference).3. Understanding, interpreting and conveying new legal requirements and their implications to the organisation.4. Using complex reasoning, by explaining specialist or unique knowledge and data in such a way as to influence others’ thinking and negotiating with them to achieve an outcome or decision.5. Making presentations designed to engage and transform thinking to sizeable or mixed interest groups, or groups with diverse levels of understanding of the subject matter.6. Negotiating a new, complex organisation-wide contract with an external supplier or customer, for example a new system of employee benefits, or large items of capital expenditure.7. Translating and interpreting technical or conceptual information into or from another language for an international audience involving learning or decision-making.8. Using audio or online video conference calls to carry out a tutorial or meeting with recipients based in regional, national and / or international locations where the cultural context is very different and requires considerable tact and diplomacy.Written Communication Covers communication through written, electronic or visual means in both informal and formal situations. This may include conveying basic factual information clearly and accurately; conveying information in the most appropriate format; and explaining complex or detailed specialist information.Written or Electronic Communication and Visual MediaQuestion 4. Is the role holder required to understand and convey: straightforward information in a clear and accurate manner? Guidance: Describes the basic level of written communication required where the role holder is required to use and understand straightforward information clearly and accurately.  This basic level of written communication will probably be required for most roles.  However, it is possible that a role holder will not be required to undertake this level of communication all the time.Examples: 1. Taking a message and recording it in a suitable format to aid understanding.2. Transferring information from a paper system to an electronic system.3. Preparing standard letters where the role holder refers to a script or approved text.4. Straightforward correspondence including e-mails where no explanation of jargon or specific terminology is required.5. Confirming appointments, course or meeting dates to members of a network.6. Writing a set of simple instructions without the use of specialist terminology or jargon.7. Completing simple forms with information that can be easily understood by anybody without further help or explanation.All types of visual media and written / electronic communication are covered in this Element.  This includes adaptations made to aid the communication process for people with disabilities, as required by the Equality Act 2010, and may include Braille and Blissymbols.The methods used to communicate with and by people with disabilities should be treated as all others. The content of the communication, not the language employed, is under consideration.  When another language is being used, account should be taken of the fluency of both the communicator and the audience when deciding how to score the evidence.It is essential to always take the audience into account when scoring evidence to determine the difficulty or complexity of the communication process. Therefore, account should be taken of the recipient’s level of understanding.  Generally, communication is a less skilful and demanding process when communicator and recipient share a similar level of knowledge and understanding of the subject matter.Question 5. Is the role holder required to understand and convey: information which needs careful explanation or interpretation to help others understand, taking into account what to communicate and how best to convey the information to others? Guidance: Describes those roles where the role holder is required to clarify non-routine issues or information.  The role holder will employ a range of language over and above that found in everyday usage.  Consideration will also be given to the format and tone used, explanation of less common jargon or terminology to improve the clarity of the message and help understanding.  Examples:1. Drafting a standard tender document where care is needed to ensure those wishing to submit to the tender understand the terms and conditions correctly.2. Drafting and / or composing detailed, factual reports for others to present where accuracy is required to reflect a specific scenario and to assist those using the information to make decisions.3. Drafting guides to course modules where the ability to group and break down information is necessary to achieve a learning objective.4. Writing brochures or advertising material to influence and enhance the understanding of the audience.5. Writing notes of meetings, or records from experimental observations to ensure accuracy of content and context.6. Writing a grant application where a case needs to be made following guidelines supplied by the funding body.7. Proofreading or editing the work of others when it is important to ensure the argument and presentation contained within that work is not altered from the original.8. Writing minutes of complex meetings where the minute taker is required to understand the topics / issues discussed and report in an appropriate format to ensure an accurate and clear record of the meeting.Question 6. Is the role holder required to understand and convey: complex conceptual ideas or complex information which may be highly detailed, technical or specialist? Guidance: Refers to those roles where the role holder is required to both understand and convey communication of a complex, multi-faceted, specialist or conceptual nature.  This includes developing material where considerable skill is required to ensure that it is understandable to those outside the area of work, or where topics from a number of disciplines are combined, or where the discourse requires a number of alternative models to aid understanding.  Examples: 1. Writing research papers, journal articles and material for publication that contain different models or paradigms to explain the outputs and intentions.2. Drafting user and training manuals for equipment, systems or software or writing explanations of techniques and models, regulations or procedures where the information has to be broken down carefully to ensure the audience can follow the path of logic to satisfy learning objectives.3. Preparing technical specifications for complex contracts such as new buildings, service specifications or capital equipment where accuracy of facts, figures and details are critical to ensure the supply of the correct goods and services.4. Compiling the case for the resourcing of multi-centre projects that impact on the delivery of strategic performance indicators for the organisation.5. Producing answers to policy questions, procedures and guidelines on complex systems or subjects where issues of precedence are set or influenced.6. Writing reports, letters or other documents dealing with complex, contentious and sensitive situations where there is a critical need to reflect a wide and varied range of views and opinions.

2. Teamwork & MotivationCovers teamwork and team leadership when working in both internal and external teams. This may include contributing as an active member of the team; motivating others in the team; and providing leadership and direction for the team.Team is used here to mean a number of people (i.e. more than two) who work together to achieve a common purpose. This definition should be used consistently throughout the questionnaire when considering work and outputs delivered by the ‘team’ and how individual talents and relationships are developed to define the ‘team’, particularly in Team Development.An individual can be a member of one or more teams at the same time.  A supervisor or manager can be responsible for more than one team.An identified leader or manager will have responsibility for ensuring all team members are aligned to the common purpose defined by a specific set of tasks or objectives. HERA does not measure quantity. What is being measured here is the level within a team (i.e. line manager or not); the complexity of the teams being managed; and whether a role holder manages managers who have their own teams, or whether they manage teams that work in several areas / departments across the organisation with a diverse range of roles and specialisms.The frequency of undertaking management responsibilities is also being measured.Teams can be: 1. internal or external, and may include team members drawn together for a specific purpose or outcome; 2. individuals within the team may have a lot of day-to-day contact with one member who takes responsibility for leading team members who are located together; 3. established for a limited time or purpose; diverse in terms of the frequency or nature of contact between team members depending on their location, working pattern or role;4.  ‘leaderless’, where members of teams, work or project groups are drawn together to do a specific job or achieve a specified outcome; 5. fixed or changing in nature or membership; 6. matrix in nature, where membership and work cuts ‘horizontally’ across the traditional ‘vertical’ silos of function or geography. Matrix teams are sometimes referred to as virtual, multi-departmental, dual reporting or organisationally complex. Management in a matrix team leads to some people having more than one reporting line (whether ‘solid’ or ‘dotted’), and often means working with colleagues from different functions, business units or locations. In a global structure there may be additional challenges created by working across cultures and time zones.A team is not the same as a network. Networks should be considered under Liaison and Networking.If the role holder is required to work as part of the team alongside external contractors on a routine basis, the nature of their responsibilities in relation to this aspect of their role should be considered here. If this activity is more about simply reporting and communication, it should be considered under Liaison and Networking.TARGET Response Table:Which of the questions below is:A the main focus (use once)?B important requirement, frequently used?C important requirement, occasionally used?D implicit or not relevant?Maximum 70 pointsIdentifying the main focusIf question 9 is deemed to be the main focus, questions 7 and 8 will be regarded as implicit and should be scored D. Decisions will then be needed about whether to allocate responses B, C, or D to questions 10 and 11 (evidence of the frequency will be required to help determine the B or C response).Question 7. Is the role holder required to: participate in and deliver their contribution to a team? Refers to a role holder who needs to be co-operative when asked, and provides a contribution to overall team objectives.  Examples of typical team names may include a clerical or technical support team, a catering team, a maintenance team, or a research or project team.Examples:1. A team member who does not need to work with other team members to achieve their own or team objectives because they work on a specific subject / topic or service unique to them.2. A team member who works apart from other members of their team in another location or area of a building and has the relevant knowledge and skills to be able to work on their own without reference to other team members.Question 8. Is the role holder required to: be supportive and encouraging of others in a team; Help to build co-operation by setting an example and showing a flexible approach to delivering team results; contribute to building team morale as an active participant in the team?Guidance: Describes a role holder required to play a proactive part in the team by offering mutual support to colleagues where the members are all pulling together.  This may be in a self-directed or leaderless team, or in a team with a remote leader.  This may also include co-ordinating the work of the team.Examples:1. An experienced member of the team who is required to act as a point of reference to colleagues.2. A team member who co-ordinates the work of others to ensure team priorities are met.3. A team member whose activity is reliant upon working with other team members to complete the end task / service.4. A team member who works with other team members who are all skilled / experienced and / or may work remotely from, and without reference to, a line manager on regular basis.5. A member of an administrative support team who provides administrative services in one faculty to academic staff and also works with the central function University Registry team responsible for managing graduations.For those with supervisory responsibilities, such as a team leader who has no line management responsibility, it is possible to score A for question 8 and B or C for question 9 depending on the frequency.Where a role holder line manages one staff member and carries out timekeeping sanctions, disciplinary action and performance management, a score of A for question 8, and B for question 9 may be appropriate.For example, for an Engineer role which manages contractors on the organisation’s premises and carries out timekeeping monitoring, work standard checking and has authority to send contractors off site, a score of A for question 8, and B or C for question 9 may be appropriate.Question 9. Is the role holder required to: 	› clarify the requirements and agree clear task objectives for team members;	› organise and delegate work fairly according to individual abilities;	› help the team members focus their efforts on the task in hand and motivate individual team members?Guidance: Describes a role where the role holder is required to set, monitor and oversee the work of the team on a day-to-day basis, i.e. an operational line manager. This would include being responsible for allocating work, monitoring its achievement by team members and providing feedback to them.  The role holder would be expected to take initial remedial action if required and to recognise the work of the team.  Generally, the overall strategic direction of the team is determined by another manager at a senior level.Examples: 1. Overseeing the work of a team, unit or section; setting, delegating and monitoring tasks / activities against objectives and standards.2. Taking responsibility for leading, overseeing and monitoring the work allocation, key deliverables and timescales for individuals in a project team; or leading a team that delivers a service, course, module or pathway.3. Taking day-to-day responsibility for ensuring that activities carried out in different locations by different individuals and teams meet team objectives.For those with dual responsibilities, such as a section leader who is part of the departmental management team, it is possible to score A for question 9 and B for question 10.  If the role holder also contributes to strategic planning or responsibilities for cross-university functions, question 11 can be scored C.Question 10. Is the role holder required to: › form and communicate a clear vision of what is to be achieved overall by a team or several sections within the overall team;› encourage individuals to contribute to this common goal to the best of their ability;›create a sense of unity and common purpose?Guidance: Describes a manager of the team who has overall responsibility for the strategic direction and leadership of the team, setting the team’s vision, goals, and planning current and future resources. The overall team may be made up of several sections or units, including a matrix manager.Examples:1. A Head of a section, department or service that spans either one very large team or a number of smaller team groupings within an umbrella team2. A subject or programme leader, or Enterprise or Research project manager3. An academic leader who has specific responsibility for aligning colleagues within a faculty to meet key performance indicators for teaching and learning, whilst also providing strategic leadership as a member of a Senior Management Team and leading a major research team For those with more senior dual responsibilities, such as a programme leader who is part of the strategic management team, it is possible to score A for question 10, and B for question 11.  Question 11. Is the role holder required to: › understand and manage the inter-relationship between different teams and their impact on the overall aims of the organisation;› help to break down barriers between teams; › build beneficial working relationships across teams?Guidance: Describes a role where the role holder manages across teams beyond the boundaries of their immediate work team and across a significant proportion of the organisation.  They are required to manage the relationship between teams at a strategic level in the organisation and ensure they interact effectively to achieve the common purpose of the organisation.  It is likely that there would be evidence of delegated responsibilities to role holders below this level. The role holder would be expected to act if there was evidence of teams not working together effectively.Examples:1. Strategic senior management roles spanning several departments or functional areas, e.g. the Senior manager / Strategic Leader of the Corporate Resources Teams such as Finance, Human Resources, IT Services, Estates or Facilities, where all the managers of these areas are direct reports.2. Leadership roles in a significant area of work such as regional development, overseeing research activity or quality audit and being required to draw together staff from across the organisation3. Liaison & Networking Covers liaising with others both within and outside the organisation and creating networks of useful contacts. This may include passing on information promptly to colleagues; ensuring mutual exchange of information; influencing developments through one’s contacts; and building an external reputation.For each question select the response which best reflects the evidence:Response A is the highest level, where the purpose of the liaison or networking is to:build a reputation;market the organisation;advance the profession or subject;influence external developments;generate benefits for the organisation as a whole.Typically, role holders operating at this level will have a significant presence externally as the ‘face of the organisation’. This could be linked to their academic profile or be as a result of high-level engagement with the local community or businesses or as the ‘spokesperson’ for the organisation.Response B is used where role holders either individually or collaboratively are involved in:influencing events or decisions;undertaking active collaboration to pursue a shared interest.Response C is used where role holders either individually or collaboratively are required to:ensure dissemination of information in the right format to the right people at the right time;build relationships and contacts to facilitate future exchange of information.Response D is used where role holders are required to:pass on information promptly;keep people informed to ensure co-ordination of effort and that work is done effectively.Response E is used if there is no evidence of the activity being carried out.A maximum of 65 pointsA response letter (A, B, C, D, or E) should be given to the evidence of activity for each question to indicate the purpose of the activity.In these Elements, the level and complexity of requirements increases incrementally in the dimensions used for the questions and responses.Question 12. Is the role holder required to: carry out standard day-to-day liaison using existing procedures? Describes the liaison that would be expected for those roles that are required to have regular contact with people outside their work team(s) (as defined for Teamwork and Motivation).Question 13. Is the role holder required to: participate in networks within the organisation or externally? Used for those roles where the role holder is required to participate in groups or networks outside their immediate work team(s) (as defined in Teamwork and Motivation).Question 14. Is the role holder required to: initiate, develop or lead internal networks? Used when the role holder is required to create, develop or lead networks inside the organisation.Should only be used for those roles whose holders play a major part in forming, developing or leading internal network(s).  Their involvement in the network(s) will be agreed by the organisation and form part of the requirements of their role.Question 15. Is the role holder required to: initiate, develop or lead networks which are external to the organisation? Guidance: Used when the role holder is required to create, develop or lead networks or groups outside the organisation.Should be used only for those roles whose holders play a major part in forming, developing or leading external network(s).  Their involvement in the network(s) will be agreed by the organisation and form part of the requirements of their role.4. Service Delivery Covers the provision of help and assistance to a high standard of service to students, visitors, members of staff and other users of the organisation. This may include reacting to requests for information or advice; actively offering or promoting the services of the organisation to others; and setting the overall standards of service offered.A customer is defined here as anyone receiving services from the organisation and its staff whether delivered face-to-face or remotely. Services are provided to students, potential students, employers, members of the public, industrial and commercial clients, conference participants, job applicants, and other people who deal with the organisation.Some staff may have little direct involvement with students or other external users yet still provide a service to colleagues in other parts of the organisation. For example, accountants may provide financial information and guidance to heads of departments, AV technicians may support lecturers by advising on the use of equipment, and librarians may help lecturers identify resources.Designing course content should not be included here, but under Teaching and Learning Support. However, identifying gaps in provision or the need to develop courses or programmes in response to feedback and changing demands should be considered here.Identifying the main focusIf question 17 is deemed to be the main focus, question 16 will be regarded as implicit and should be scored D. Decisions will then be needed about whether to allocate responses B, C, or D to question 18 (evidence of the frequency will be required to help determine the B or C response).Question 16: Is the role holder required to: › deal with internal or external contacts who ask for a service or require information; › create a positive image of the organisation by being responsive and prompt in responding to requests and referring the user to the right person if necessary;  › deliver a service that is usually initiated by the customer, and typically involves routine tasks with set standards or procedures?Guidance: Reflects the basic skill level required and is used for those roles where the role holder reacts to the approaches of others.Examples:1. Responding to requests for information from employees, students, parents, or members of the public2. Providing answers to questions regularly posed, drawing upon pre-prepared materials for the answers.3. Responding to breakdowns, system or mechanical failures or predictable requests for help.4. Providing helpdesk supportQuestion 17 Is the role holder required to: › deal with internal or external contacts where the service is usually initiated by the role holder, working within the organisation’s overall procedures or policies? OR › proactively seek to explore and understand customers’ needs; › adapt the service accordingly to ensure the usefulness or appropriateness and quality of service (content, time, accuracy, level of information, cost)? Guidance: Refers to a role holder who is expected to initiate contact with customers or explore customers’ needs and adapt the service to meet them.  It has two parts and should be used if either part is appropriate.  Examples: 1. Approaching customers to establish what is required (e.g. agreeing a conference programme or details of a research project or in-house training contract, designing promotional campaign material or discussing future skill needs with employers)2. Contacting potential customers to let them know of new services3. Surveying customer needs, obtaining information from them about their assessment of the service (e.g. obtaining student feedback), and adapting the service accordingly4. Gathering feedback on the levels of service usage (e.g. levels of room occupancy or stock use) and adapting the service to make it more effective or appropriate5. Discussing and agreeing amendments to work schedules directly with service users.Question 18: Is the role holder required to: › set the overall standards for service across a function or area of the organisation; › 	monitor service levels; › pre-empt changes in customers’ needs and anticipate future requirements; › maintain overall quality, balancing different demands; › ensure others have the support they need to provide a quality service and fulfil their role? Guidance: Refers to a role holder who is responsible for setting standards and determining the quality of service to be provided.  Function or area of service means a significant operation (such as a school, faculty or department or range of activity provided across the organisation).Examples:1. Setting overall quality assurance or learning and teaching standards for the organisation.2. Forecasting the impact of new legislation on the organisation and developing new procedures to ensure compliance.3. Defining service levels for the function and ensuring adherence to them.4. Setting and maintaining standards for the organisation’s library and learning resources services.5. Overseeing student recruitment trends and identifying what action should be taken to achieve targets6. Developing ethical research policy standards and protocols for the organisation7. Identifying potential areas for consultancy and knowledge transfer or research contracts, and creating a framework to ensure that projects run according to planThe role holder should not score A here if standards are set by internal regulation or external requirements such as legislation. Those guiding others on what standards to set, for example by being part of a steering group,   may score B.5.Decision-Making   Processes & Outcomes Covers the impact of decisions within the organisation and externally. This may include decisions which impact on one’s own work or on one’s team; decisions which impact across the organisation; and decisions which could have significant impact in the longer term within or outside the organisation.MATRIX Response Table Maximum 70 pointsDo the decisions have a: Major Impact - Response A is the most demanding level, requiring the highest level of skill. Decisions at this level will affect the whole organisation, impacting on policy and operations across the majority of departments and affecting most members of staff or students. Examples include:1. deciding how to obtain alternative sources of income for the organisation 2. deciding the nature and level of degrees and diplomas 3. forming strategic alliances with other bodies or organisations Significant - Response B s used for far-reaching, complex and long-lasting decisions (e.g. three Impact	to five years).Examples include:1. delegating significant on-going responsibilities to a number of staff 2. allocating student numbers to departments or units 3. developing a new service or changing existing work practices that affect broad areas of the organisationModerate - Response C describes decisions that will have an impact of limited spread which Impact	may endure for some time.Examples include: 1. buying non-routine stock or equipment following policy, guidelines and purchasing procedures, e.g. hardware and software 2. authorising money from a previously agreed budget, in line with financial regulations3. deciding who to involve in a working group 4. deciding which students to admit to a course 5. appointing a new member of staffMinor Impact - Response D describes the lowest level of decision-making, i.e. decisions that have an immediate impact, which can easily be amended and have little effect beyond the immediate area of the role holder’s work.Examples include: 1. deciding when to hold a meeting 2. choosing stock from the preferred suppliers listNot Relevant- Response E should be used if this type of decision-making is not relevant to the role.Question 19 Is the role holder required to: › take independent decisions? Guidance: Relates to independent decisions made by the role holder based on their own knowledge and experience.The decision is not made independently if another body or person approves or endorses the role holder’s decision or it is made according to rules and procedures.Examples:1. Independent decisions include those taken:2. by a role holder to decide on the right tools or techniques to be used to carry out a task 3. by a role holder to decide the appropriate training event for a team member to meet a development need 4. by a role holder to decide on what to include in a tender document for services to be provided Question 20: Is the role holder required to: › be party to some collaborative decisions; work with others to reach an optimal conclusion? Guidance: Relates to collaborative decisions made by the role holder with others, usually following a discussion and weighing up of facts. Collaborative decisions include: 1. a role holder and their manager in agreement where both are accountable for the decision regarding allocation of work within a team 2. a working group or project team agreeing proposals for changes to service provision 3. a committee or management team determining future focus for strategic plansQuestion 21 Is the role holder required to: › provide advice or input to contribute to the decision-making of others? Guidance: Relates to situations where the role holder contributes to the decision-making of others and has responsibility to advise others, provide input or make recommendations.Examples : 1. Contributing to decisions includes:2. a role holder providing information and data to help a line manager decide on a purchasing decision 3. a role holder making the business case for additional staffing to a school resourcing committee 4. a role holder providing the facts of an investigation to an external consultant who will make recommendations based on this.6. Planning & Organising Resources Covers organising, prioritising and planning time and resources (human, physical or financial). This may include planning and organising one’s own work; planning work for others on day-to-day tasks or on projects; carrying out operational planning; and planning for future years.This Element covers all types of planning and organising resources including finance, capital, and people. It includes those roles where the role holders are responsible for organising their own work, that of others, and project-related work.The creation of plans to satisfy training and development needs should be considered here in the same way as all other plans requiring the commitment and utilisation of resources.Identifying the main focusIf question 24 is deemed to be the main focus, questions 22 and 23 will be regarded as implicit and should be scored D. Decisions will then be needed about whether to allocate responses B, C, or D to questions 25 and 26 (evidence of the frequency will be required to help determine the B or C response).TARGET Response Table:Which of the questions below is:• A the main focus (use once)?• B important requirement, frequently used?• C important requirement, occasionally used?• D implicit or not relevant?A maximum of 70 pointsQuestion 22: Is the role holder required to: › complete tasks to a given plan, with allocated resources?Guidance: Describes the basic skill level required and applies to those following the instructions of others and with little or no discretion to plan own work.Examples:1. Working to a set pattern each day2. Carrying out routine maintenance3. Preparing food to a specific set of instructions4. Processing data to a scheduled timetable and following database rules5. Working from a detailed set of instructions where the order of tasks is very important.Question 23: Is the role holder required to: › plan, prioritise and organise their own work or resources to achieve agreed objectives?Guidance: Refers to those roles where the holder is expected to decide their own pattern of work and can select the order in which tasks are completed, providing the required output is achieved.Examples:1. Discretion to plan when and how to respond to requests for information or assistance2. Planning stock replacement schedules3. Prioritising work to meet set deadlines4. Designing a piece of equipment and planning how it will be made.Question 24 Is the role holder required to: › plan, prioritise and organise the work or resources of self and others within own area on a daily, weekly or monthly basis;› plan and manage small projects, ensuring the effective use of resources;› receive information from and provide information to others to complete their planning; › monitor progress against the plan? Guidance: Aimed at those who plan and prioritise their own work and the work of others to meet objectives, and / or set timeframes for effective delivery. They may be required to plan projects. Typically, this will be used in supervisory and team leader roles as defined in Teamwork and Motivation.Examples: 1. Supervising and being accountable for the resources (people, equipment, money) of a subsection of a department2. Supervising a specific project, e.g. organising a conference or event such as a graduation ceremony or open day, where the role holder is prioritising and monitoring the work of those contributing to the project.3. Organising and co-ordinating a health and safety audit4. Being responsible for the delivery of a course or programme of study to which others contribute.Question 25:Is the role holder required to: › take responsibility for the operational planning and implementation of larger projects or an area of work; › co-ordinate a number of teams or projects on a monthly, quarterly or annual basis; › set performance standards and establish monitoring procedures to keep track of progress across these different aspects of work; › provide input to longer term planning? Guidance: Used for those roles responsible for developing their area’s strategic plans that are aligned to the organisation’s strategic plans, mission and values.The type of plan, which will affect a substantial area of work, is likely to last longer than one year and may possibly involve people from several teams. Typically, this will be used for those responsible for leading and / or directing the whole area (including subdivisions) where they are accountable for the effective delivery of the plan and the performance of all those who are lead contributors to the plan. Examples: might include being responsible for a whole unit such as a school, department, service or a large research group or major collaborative project (e.g. one involving staff drawn from several units or areas across the organisation).Score B for this question for those roles whose holders contribute to their area’s strategic plans.Examples:1. Setting the budget or budgets for one or more significant areas of expenditure2. Managing staff resources across a large team, e.g. department, or smaller number of teams with inter-related complexities in terms of timescales and conflicting resources3. Setting objectives to one large team or more than one team covering a significant area of work across the organisation (e.g. whole department and subdivisions of that department where those subdivisions have a leader directly reporting to the role holder)4. Monitoring progress and keeping to the timescale for a large complex project or a number of inter-related projects5. Leading the planning and development of their area’s strategic plans, typically for timescales of three to five years6. Co-ordinating and monitoring the roll-out of plans across a significant area of the organisation.Question 26: Is the role holder required to: › carry out planning on a long-term, strategic basis that will affect large parts or the whole of the organisation, and possibly national or international activities? Guidance: Refers to the highest level and describes the responsibilities of those leading and contributing to the development of strategic plans for significant parts/areas of, or the whole organisation.Score B for this question for those roles whose holders contribute to but do not lead the organisational strategic planning process.Examples:1. Taking organisation-wide responsibility for student recruitment and setting long-term objectives and timescales to meet business plan objectives2. Academic or resource planning where leadership is required to ensure a large number of staff and outcomes are delivered in alignment with organisational vision and mission3. Estates and capital planning for large-scale, high-value projects that are part of long-term capacity building for the organisation4. Contributing to strategic planning outside the organisation such as regional development or educational development of a professional body5. Leads and contributes to the organisation’s detailed strategic planning, development and delivery6. Ensures that strategic plans for individual areas align to the organisation’s mission, values and overarching strategy.7.  Initiative & Problem-Solving Covers identifying or developing options and selecting solutions to problems which occur in the role. This may include using initiative to select from available options; resolving problems where an immediate solution may not be apparent; dealing with complex problems; and anticipating problems which could have major repercussions.Evidence is scored here when it relates to identifying actual or potential problems, considering or devising a range of possible solutions and implementing the one deemed most appropriate. Considering solutions can vary from acting within set guidelines to having to create innovative responses to unprecedented problems.Aspects of problem-solving such as devising schemes to generate income should be included here as the purpose of this activity is to resolve a problem.Evidence should not be scored here if it relates to analytical and theoretical research. Research is defined as the systematic study of data obtained from a variety of sources in order to establish facts and reach new conclusions. Evidence of this type of activity should be scored under Analysis and Research.Identifying the main focusIf question 28 is deemed to be the main focus, question 27 will be regarded as implicit and should be scored D. Decisions will then be needed about whether to allocate responses B, C, or D to questions 29 and 30 (evidence of the frequency will be required to help determine the B or C response).TARGET Response Table:Which of the questions below is:• A the main focus (use once)?• B important requirement, frequently used?• C important requirement, occasionally used?• D implicit or not relevant?A maximum of 80 pointsQuestion 27: Is the role holder required to: › solve standard day-to-day problems as they arise; › choose between a limited number of options which have clear consequences, by following guidelines or referring to what has been done before; › recognise when a problem should be referred to others?Guidance: Describes the basic skill level required, and is applied to those roles where there are often laiddown procedures or custom and practice, and therefore little scope for discretion.  Examples: 1. The kind of problems that recur on a regular, routine basis2. Carrying out first line repairs of equipment or machinery following prescribed procedures3. Organising temporary cover for absent staff in a facilities service team to ensure enough waiting staff are available to serve conference diners4. Informing relevant people about an emergency such as illness following a set of standard procedures5. Making travel and accommodation arrangements within specific guidelines on a regular basis6. First-line support on an IT helpdesk, resolving standard software, hardware, and technological problems; and recording, reporting and scheduling non-standard problems for next level IT support to resolve.Question 28Is the role holder required to: › use initiative and creativity to resolve problems where the optimal solution may not be immediately apparent but has to be assessed by a process of reasoning, weighing up the pros and cons of different approaches; › identify and assess practical options; › break the problem down into component parts? Guidance: Applies to those roles where the holder is expected to use judgement and initiative to resolve problems that are less predictable.  The range of choices may be defined by a set of procedures or guidelines, or by training and application of knowledge.Examples:1. Dealing with attendance problems where there is some case history and or legal obligations that need to be considered before taking any action, e.g. the individual has a condition that is covered under the Equality Act2. Finding an alternative bench reagent in a laboratory after carrying out a risk assessment and identifying that the requested chemical is not suitable for the particular application3. Dealing with the issues arising from a student’s failure to submit course work4. Evaluating the strengths and weaknesses of options and then identifying an appropriate equipment warranty5. Dealing with staff underperformance, identifying the reasons and considering appropriate action to support improvement.Question 29: Is the role holder required to: › resolve problems where there is a mass of information or diverse, partial and conflicting data, with a range of potential options available; › apply creativity to devise varied solutions, approaching the problem from different perspectives? Guidance: Describes the skills required to resolve problems that occur infrequently and where the available guidance is not specific.  The choice of solution is complicated by the range of information available and the way to resolve the situation is not clear.  This level includes having to deal with several complex problems at the same time.Examples:1. Devising new courses or programmes of study to meet organisational objectives to improve student recruitment2. Dealing with anomalies and unexpected demands on a department’s budget for a large expenditure account that impacts across a significant area of the organisation3. Investigating an area of ineffective working or systems failure and developing approaches to improve operational effectiveness by introducing a new system or simplifying practices of an office, workshop or laboratory.4. Reviewing policy and guidance and developing new guidelines or procedures, such as those regulating use of finance, managing attendance, or cyber security5. Carrying out a scoping exercise, gathering data from a range of sources to identify potential external partners, consultancy opportunities or other sources of income.Question 30 Is the role holder required to: › resolve problems where there is a lack of precedent which call for innovation and creative thought to develop appropriate options;› anticipate problems and make projections; › initiate solutions which take into account strategic implications for the organisation and which do not limit future choices?Guidance: Refers to the highest level of skill, and describes those situations that are novel to the organisation.  This does not mean that the solution may be totally unknown elsewhere but that significant adjustments are needed to make the proposed action suit the context.  Examples: 1. Identifying the implications of government and sector policy and impact of changes to the funding of the organisation2. Implementing a new organisational culture and managing the change process across a significant part or whole of the organisation3. Developing and implementing a new marketing approach for the organisation4. Defining problems with current finance procedures and practice and implementing new procedures and protocols, changing the way that resources are allocated across the organisation5. Identifying a significant gap in the overall student services, and designing and implementing new procedures and processes to ensure the organisation improves published metrics and organisational reputation6. Implementing new government legislation and considering the results and devising actions for resolving any identified areas that need addressing e.g. GDPR (General Data Protection Regulation)8. Analysis & Research Covers investigating issues, analysing information and carrying out research. This may include following standard procedures to gather and analyse data; identifying and designing appropriate methods of research; collating and analysing a range of data from different sources; establishing new methods or models for research; and setting the context for research. This Element includes all aspects of investigation, analysis and research, and is relevant to all roles, not just those engaged in academic research.Evidence should be scored here if it relates to information and data collection, including analytical and theoretical research. Research is defined as the systematic study of data obtained from a variety of sources in order to establish facts and reach new conclusions.Investigation is defined as looking into an issue, asking others, and gathering and examining data from a range of sources. Examples of activities included under this Element include individual and collaborative investigations involving the collection of data from appropriate sources; literature or database searches; internet searches; engaging in action research; holding discussions with other practitioners; and examination of data using statistical or other analytical methods.Identifying the main focusIf question 32 is deemed to be the main focus, question 31 will be regarded as implicit and should be scored D. Decisions will then be needed about whether to allocate responses B, C, or D to questions 33, 34, and 35 (evidence of the frequency will be required to help determine the B or C response).TARGET Response Table:Which of the questions below is:• A the main focus (use once)?• B important requirement, frequently used?• C important requirement, occasionally used?• D implicit or not relevant?A maximum of 70 pointsQuestion 31 Is the role holder required to: › establish the basic facts in situations which require further investigation and inform others if necessary; › gather and record routine data?Guidance: Refers to the lowest level of activity where recording of data or information is carried out by following procedures.Examples:1. Inputting, adding and revising data on a database, e.g. adding the personal details of a new member of staff to the HR and Payroll databases2. Balancing and reconciling money in the cash register against sales3. Carrying out routine electrical safety checks and recording results4. Checking stock levels against the inventory5. Checking statistics against source data and reporting anomalies6. Searching the internet for basic information such as train timesQuestion 32 Is the role holder required to: › analyse routine data or information using predetermined procedures and gathering the information from standard sources; › work accurately to complete the task precisely as specified?Guidance: Describes the skills involved in gathering, collating and manipulating routine data so that it can be interpreted or understood by others.Examples:1. Obtaining data by carrying out literature and subject-specific database searches by identifying key words2. Setting up and conducting simple experiments, and recording and collating results3. Monitoring resource usage on a spreadsheet (e.g. expenditure against a budget, the consumption of energy or space utilisation)4. Collating data and providing statistics using tried and tested methods (e.g. in spreadsheets)5. Interrogating databases to produce standard reports (e.g. the number of students enrolled on a course or assessment marks)Question 33 Is the role holder required to: › identify an appropriate existing method of analysis or investigation according to the data and objectives; › recognise and interpret trends or patterns in data; › identify or source additional information which could potentially help the investigation as the analysis progresses?Guidance: Applies when the role holder is required to decide how to conduct the investigation as well as analyse, interpret and report the findings in an appropriate format, which can be read and understood by others.Examples: 1. Analysing student destination statistics and reporting patterns and trends for senior decisionmakers2. Selecting and designing complex questionnaires, survey methods or tests (including medical tests) and interpreting the results3. Investigating the impact and implications of changes to funding for a range of research projects with inter-related and competing demands4. Conducting enquiries into complex complaints or system failures and indicating where improvements are needed.Question 34 Is the role holder required to: › analyse or research complex ideas, concepts or extensive data from different perspectives;› work out how best to apply existing methodologies according to the overall context, objectives and expectations; › identify the relationship between complex, interdependent factors? Guidance: Involves the investigation of complex matters and issues. It is unlikely that anyone other than those engaged in research or those involved in enquiring into highly complex and sensitive matters would score A or B on this question.Examples:1. Developing methodologies and designing data-gathering and analytical techniques (including statistical, qualitative and quantitative methods) to provide appropriate evidence for a research project.2. Creating new experiments or methods to test hypotheses or theories3. Examining discourse, texts or phenomena from new and different perspectives4. Integrating concepts from different disciplines to interpret findings5. Synthesizing results so they may be applied6. Forming conclusions to explain relationships between data or phenomena7. Leading, investigating and compiling a report for a multifaceted and sensitive disciplinary offence or grievance such as alleged sexual harassment of a student by a member of staffQuestion 35 Is the role holder required to: › identify the research question within a specific context; › generate original ideas to build on existing concepts; › 	generate new concepts and methodologies; › develop new avenues of research? Guidance: Refers to the highest level of skill required and is aimed at those who are required on a regular basis to initiate major research activities and / or lead research investigations into significant matters.  Examples:1. Identifying major gaps in existing knowledge to be researched2. Setting the parameters of the question to be researched3. Describing the intended research impact4. Determining the overall direction of major research projects to be conducted by others5. Liaising with national research bodies to identify future research requirements The role holder may be required to set the context for research or shape the broad research agenda in the field or specialism.9.Sensory & Physical DemandsCovers the sensory and physical aspects of the role required to complete tasks. This may include the use of physical effort, co-ordination and dexterity and involve using aural evidence to assess next actions; applying skilled techniques and co-ordinating sensory information; and high levels of dexterity where precision or accuracy is essential.Question 36:Select the response which, in its entirety, best reflects the evidence.Guidance: This refers to the use of all senses (sight, smell, hearing, taste, and touch) either singly or in combination, and covers roles requiring the use of physical skills and effort. You should consider the multiplier effect where the greater the level of demand or difficulty combines with a greater range of senses and physical effort.SINGLE Response TableSelect one of the responses below which, in its entirety, best reflects the evidence:A maximum of 50 pointsResponse A Is the role holder required to: › carry out highly specialist or very complex tasks requiring either mastery of a wide range of complex sensory or physical techniques or involving unusually intense physical effort?Guidance: Refers to roles which are specialist and require highly developed skills.  The role holder will be expected to demonstrate great sensitivity to subtle differences.  These roles will require the co-ordination of several if not all senses, and involve very high levels of skill, dexterity and fine degrees of control.  Precision, speed and co-ordination of the senses will be essential.  Intense physical effort may also be involved. Examples:1. Conducting experiments that use multi-aspect equipment or fragile, rare or volatile samples2. Working in high risk environments that require vigilance and care and where adaptation and reaction to rapidly changing circumstances will be required (avoid double-counting evidence under Work Environment)3. Remaining in one position for long periods of time or holding and using sophisticated tools for prolonged periods, for example when performing surgery on people or animals4. Gathering underwater samples when using scuba diving equipment and clothing5. Creating objects using sophisticated tools, multiple or high value materialsResponse B Is the role holder required to: › carry out tasks which require either mastery of a range of sensory or physical techniques, concentration to co-ordinate different senses or precision in applying these sensory skills, or involve considerable physical effort?Guidance: Refers to roles where the holder co-ordinates and interprets various sensory data.  The holder will be required to use well-developed skills acquired over time.  There will be considerable demand for high levels of concentration and precision.  Alternatively, the role holder may be required to use considerable physical effort, for example by being engaged in prolonged and strenuous work.Examples: 1. Playing a musical instrument2. Lifting heavy, difficult objects on a sustained and prolonged basis in situations where this cannot be carried out using machinery3. Working in confined or difficult spaces for prolonged periods of time4. Operation and repair of highly specialised, hazardous or complex tools, equipment and instruments5. Using and demonstrating physiotherapy and other clinical techniques6. Working on complex equipment such as boilers, electrical systems and similar pieces of machineryResponse C Is the role holder required to: › carry out tasks at a level which would require either learning certain methods or routines or involve moderate physical effort?Guidance: Refers to roles in which the holder is required to use materials, tools, and machinery in their work.  It also refers to roles in which the holder is routinely expected to use their physical abilities and skills to perform complex and difficult movements, including working in cramped or small spaces or in awkward positions.  Alternatively, the role holder will need skills obtained through practice over a period of time or during practical training. Care, precision and accuracy will be normally expected.Examples:1. Undertaking regular lifting of heavy, awkward or fragile objects for which manual handling training is a necessary training requirement2. Working in a variety of different buildings in confined spaces or awkward positions3. Driving vehicles for which a specialist licence is required, e.g. fork-lift truck or HGV4. Using a specialist tool or piece of equipment effectively (e.g. a microscope, test rig or printing, sewing or buffing machine) 5. Handling and / or administering standard treatment to an animal or person.Response D Is the role holder required to: › complete basic tasks which would require either a minimum of instruction or light, if any, physical effort? Guidance: Describes the basic level of skill required.  The role holder will be required to perform straightforward tasks which may involve the use of simple, generally available tools or equipment.  The training needed to perform these tasks effectively and safely will typically take the form of limited instruction including short periods of demonstration and practice. Examples:1. Standard use of office equipment such as using pen, pencil and ruler or keyboard, mouse, touchpad or other device 2. Inputting straightforward data or sourcing routine information3. Using light gardening or maintenance tools4. Use of standard laboratory equipment5. Filing or replacing items on shelves or stores6. Occasionally moving goods, equipment or light objects10. Work Environment Covers the impact the working environment has on the individual and their ability to respond to and control that environment safely. This is most likely to cover internal or external environments where conditions may change. It may include such factors as high temperature, excessive noise or fumes, exposure to harmful substances, limited light conditions, and uncontrolled living organisms. This deals with the need to take responsibility for responding to and dealing with the conditions under which the role holder or those they are responsible for are normally expected to work. The focus is on taking appropriate action to control or reduce risk in the environment or to ensure that any foreseeable impact from the environment does not result in harm.A role holder who spends their time in a variety of working environments, e.g., someone who spends the majority of their time travelling between locations as part of their role, may score A at question 37 and B at question 38.Identifying the main focusIf question 38 is deemed to be the main focus, question 37 will be regarded as implicit and should be scored C. Decisions will then be needed about whether to allocate response B to question 39 (evidence of the frequency will be required to help determine the B or C response).TARGET Response Table:Which of the questions below is:• A the main focus (use once)?• B important requirement, frequently used?• C implicit or not relevant?A maximum of 65 pointsQuestion 37 Is the role holder required to: › work in an environment which is relatively stable and has little impact on the role holder or the way in which work is completed; › be aware of health and safety procedures and report concerns to others?Guidance: Refers to work environments where a role holder is not expected to need to take control over their working environment, and there is a low level of risk.  Examples: 1. Working in an office / lecture room where the environment is stable2. Working in a non-traditional office environment, e.g. working from home, in a hub, hotdesking etc, where the role holder understands and adheres to standard health and safety guidance, which may include the need to undertake a guided risk assessment and to report any concerns to others for action.Question 38 Is the role holder required to: › understand how the work environment could impact on their own work or that of colleagues and act accordingly; › identify the level of risk and take any necessary local action within health and safety guidelines where applicable, to adapt the environment?Guidance: Relates to where the role holder is required to make decisions about how to perform their work or the work of others because of the nature of the environment. This may include occasions when the role holder will be expected to deal with stressful or difficult situations, for example, dealing with people displaying hostile or aggressive behaviour. The role holder may have responsibilities for managing the impact of the environment on the work or safety of other people, with devolved responsibility to carry out risk assessments to determine the degree of risk or level of hazard.Examples:1. Carrying out risk assessment with groups of students on field studies in external environments and / or changing weather conditions2. Working in a workshop, studio or laboratory and being required to ensure safe working practices when machinery or electrical equipment is used3. Working in an environment where the role holder is expected to deal with angry or aggressive people on a regular basis4. Completing a risk assessment and taking appropriate action5. Working in an environment where there is a need to wear protective clothing and equipment as a safeguard against biological, microbial or chemical hazards and ensuring that protective clothing is available and worn.Question 39 Is the role holder required to: › understand variability in their working environment and its potential negative impact on the work process or health and safety of themselves or colleagues, and act accordingly; › manage the level of risk in a significant unit or for the whole organisation, and ensure an appropriate response?Guidance: Includes roles in which the role holder is required to manage, directly or indirectly, the hazards inherent in work undertaken by their teams(s) or the organisation as a whole and to ensure the safety of those working in the environment under those conditions.The role holder will be expected to manage health and safety issues, which may include the identification and recording of hazards, and the provision of guidance to minimise and manage any risks.  Where necessary, it will include intervening to restructure work in response to identified hazards or risks and / or requiring others to take precautions.The role holder will be expected to act rather than refer the matter to others.Examples:1. Identifying areas where risks may occur and / or delegating others to conduct risk assessments, monitoring and overseeing to ensure compliance2. Taking responsibility for ensuring compliance with health and safety legislation and organisational practice-specific guidelines within defined areas or at an organisational level3. Acting as a point of reference for all staff and those carrying out risk assessments with regard to unusual and specific conditions.11. Pastoral Care & Welfare Covers the welfare and well-being of students and staff, in both informal and formal situations, although always in the context of what is required by the role. This may include being aware of the support services available; giving supportive advice and guidance; and counselling others on specific issues.This covers the care of the physical and mental health and well-being of students, colleagues, staff, and others within the organisation. It also includes patients or children in the role holder's care. The requirements of the role should be taken into account, not the role holder’s ability or personal inclination to provide such support to other people.The need for a counselling or similar professional qualification is specifically not mentioned in this Element for, if required, it would be covered under Knowledge and Experience.LINEAR Response Table:For each question, which response best describes the role requirements?:• A essential - frequently used• B essential - occasionally used• C not relevantA maximum of 65 pointsQuestion 40 Is the role holder required to: › show sensitivity to those who may need help or, in extreme cases, are showing signs of obvious distress; › initiate appropriate action by involving relevant people?Guidance: Covers basic sensitivity to, and consideration of, other people’s needs or feelings and may include dealing with signs of obvious distress (for example, an individual in tears).  The examples below cover situations where an A score would be expected for this question. For all other situations, the evidence should be scored B as all staff are required to provide support to others as necessary. The C response is not valid and will not be accepted by the ECC Online software.Examples:1. A line manager responsible for a number of people, who is expected to deal with welfare issues and provide support on a regular basis2. A role holder with responsibility for the care of patients or children3. Acting as the first point of contact for welfare issues and signposting staff / students to appropriate support servicesQuestion 41 Is the role holder required to: › give advice on commonly occurring welfare issues or queries;› follow standard welfare procedures for the organisation; › recognise when an individual should be referred elsewhere for professional help and respect confidentiality?Guidance: Refers to commonly occurring welfare issues that are covered by documented procedures, or when the matter can be referred to someone else for advice on how to respond.Examples: 1. Providing support and advice covering physical and mental health and well-being of students within existing policies2. Giving advice and guidance on standard sickness or compassionate leave arrangements3. Supporting those working while coping with bereavement4. Providing support to another member of staff, student or member of the public to deal with stress or other emotional demands that affect their work or studyQuestion 42 Is the role holder required to: ›give support, guidance or pastoral care where standard procedures do not always exist;› maintain confidentiality and build trust;› judge when to listen, when to give advice or guidance and when to refer the individual for professional help; › be fully aware of support networks for both themselves and the individual?Guidance: Includes dealing with complex, severe and serious welfare issues. The role holder would be expected to deal with this level of issue as part of their role although it may represent the sort of difficulty that arises exceptionally.  Typically, the person needing help would be referred to the role holder by someone else. The role holder would be required to deal with and resolve the situation and would not be able to refer the person to anyone else in the organisation, only to professionals in other agencies.Examples:1. Being responsible for providing expert guidance or therapeutic interventions to staff or students2. Counselling an individual to help deal with a life crisis such as bereavement or the breakdown of a close personal relationship, or those suffering from significant welfare issues such as workrelated stress, addiction, depression, severe debt or homelessness.12. Team Development Covers the development of the skills and knowledge of others in the work team. This may be achieved face-to-face or remotely, and includes inducting new colleagues; coaching and appraising any individuals who are supervised, mentored or managed by the role holder; and giving guidance or advice to one’s peers or supervisees on specific aspects of work. Question 43 Is the role holder required to: › advise or guide others working in the same team on standard information or procedures? Guidance: Refers to those who are expected to help new or returning members of the team.  Examples:1.  Showing a new staff member around and introducing them to team members and staff in relevant areas.2. Explaining administrative systems and procedures such as how to obtain stationery or expenses3. Explaining where to obtain material and how to use equipment used on a routine basis4. Advising where to go to obtain basic information about the organisation A score of C for this question is unlikely and would only be given when the role holder works entirely alone.Most staff are usually expected to assist colleagues and help new starters settle in and so the B score would be used most often.Question 44 Is the role holder required to: › train or guide others on specific tasks, issues or activities;› give advice, guidance and feedback on the basis of their own knowledge or experience; › deliver training?Guidance: Used for those role holders with responsibility for providing training or instruction to other members of the work team.  Coaching members of the work team and providing internal training sessions are also covered here.Examples: 1. Demonstrating how to operate a particular piece of machinery or equipment safely and in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions2. Breaking the information down and explaining the reasons for and how to follow an operational procedure3. Discussing how to make improvements to a report, making sure the team member makes notes and records learning points4. Showing a colleague how to use an ICT application, providing feedback and helping to make improvements to level of use5. Describing different ways of analysing a set of data and helping a colleague decide which method to use.Question 45 Is the role holder required to: › carry out training or development activity according to the needs of the individual or group;› identify current capabilities and future needs;› define the performance standards required;› identify appropriate developmental activity;› assess the application of learning; › give feedback and guidance on overall performance?Guidance: Used for those role holders required to identify the training and development needs of the members of the work team.  Examples:1. Analysing achievement of team objectives and identifying learning needs arising from shortfalls2. Providing feedback on performance and conducting regular staff appraisals and performance reviews3. Identifying and agreeing priorities with team members and follow-up actions necessary to satisfy any training or development needs4. Having responsibility for the oversight of performance appraisals for the area and development across the wider team. The role holder would normally be expected to ensure that agreed action is taken and follow up to ensure it has occurred.If a role holder is required to contribute to the coaching, development and instruction of others or has overall responsibility for the identification of need but is not directly involved and responsibility for doing so is held by others, this question should be scored B.13. Teaching & Learning Support Covers the development of the skills and knowledge of students and others who are not part of the work team. This may be achieved face-to-face or remotely and may include providing instruction to students or others when they are first using a particular service or working in a particular area; delivering or developing training; and the assessment and teaching of students. MATRIX Response table: A Maximum of 95 PointsSelect the response for each question which, in its entirety, best reflect the evidence.Is the role holder required to:Response A› develop innovative approaches to the learning experience and the curriculum;› originate content and methodology? Guidance:Used for those who are required to develop innovative approaches to the learning process.  They will be responsible for the development of content, including carrying out original design of material or developing different modes of delivery.  Those required to work at this level will be expected to engage in the scholarship of learning and learning processes.Response B › design content or learning materials within existing frameworks; › make appropriate modifications to existing materials on the basis of the knowledge or experience of the learner(s)? Guidance:Used for those who design teaching or learning processes.  This may involve repackaging existing material to make it suitable for a specific purpose or making minor modifications to the mode of delivery to suit the needs of the learners.  Role holders at this level may need training and development, in addition to reflecting on their practice, to enable them to work at this level.Response C› provide standard information or deliver teaching or training? Guidance:Used for those who use standard information, deliver documented training (i.e. material developed by others) or use standard modes of delivery.Response DUse if there is no evidence of this activity being carried out.This Element is relevant to:  	1. lecturers who prepare and deliver lectures, seminars and tutorials to undergraduates, graduates, summer school or distance learning students, or for in-house courses; 2. supervisors who direct the work of research and postgraduate students;  	3. librarians training others to use the library resources;  	4. language assistants demonstrating the use of a language laboratory;  	5. technicians demonstrating the use of machinery or equipment;  	6. administrative staff outlining new legislation or a procedure;  	7. those conducting training sessions e.g. on health and safety, first aid, recruitment and selection or assessment regulations;  	8. those responsible for organising staff development and training for staff and others outside the work team; 9. those supervising work and assessing progress towards advanced qualifications.Question 46 Is the role holder required to: › introduce students or others who are new to the area to standard information or procedures? Guidance: Refers to the lowest level of skill required and covers the provision of simple demonstrations or explanations given on a routine basis. Examples:1. Explaining the use of the library, computing or laboratory facilities to students, other staff or visitors2. Demonstrating how to operate simple equipment (such as a microscope, theodolite or photocopier) following basic safety procedures3. Demonstrating the basic functions of a piece of software4. Outlining the procedure for enrolling on a course or module5. Delivering standard information as part of the organisation’s staff or student induction procedureQuestion 47 Is the role holder required to: › teach or train students or others on specific tasks, issues or activities; › 	assess performance and provide feedback during the event?Guidance: Used when the role holder is required to conduct short one-off training or coaching sessions or lectures where there is some assessment of learners’ abilities and progress, and provision of feedback.Examples:1. Teaching how to operate complex machines, equipment or software2. Teaching how to conduct advanced literature or database searches3. Overseeing work experience, apprenticeships or intern placements where the role holder is expected to assess performance and provide feedback or advice4. Running staff training courses, e.g. on applying for research grants, using ICT or software, or dealing with sickness absence5. Coaching others on conducting a survey or research project. See Matrix table for more examples.Question 48 Is the role holder required to: › teach, train or facilitate development activities for individuals or groups on certain aspects or subjects within a particular academic discipline or specialism;› monitor performance, giving feedback and guidance;› act as a catalyst for further development or learning?Guidance: Applies to those role holders required to deliver a series of lectures or workshops or develop an ongoing coaching, mentoring or teaching relationship with students or members of staff outside the work team.The role holder will monitor and assess progress and achievement and provide feedback and guidance to stimulate further development and learning.Examples:1. Delivering and assessing a course, module or part of an undergraduate degree scheme2. Acting as an academic supervisor3. Mentoring members of staff from outside the work team as part of a scheme4. Leading a substantial management or teaching and learning development programme See Matrix table for more examples.Question 49 Is the role holder required to: › deliver a range of teaching or development activity within a particular academic discipline or specialism, teaching across the breadth or depth of the subject;› challenge thinking and foster debate; › encourage the development of intellectual reasoning and rigour?Guidance: Refers to the highest level of skill required and is used for role holders required to take responsibility for delivering and / or integrating a number of topics or parts of the syllabus or curriculum. Alternatively, the role holder may have oversight of Teaching and Learning throughout the organisation, and be the organisational catalyst and primary adviser on teaching and learning.Examples:1. The role holder would be required to guide students or members of staff from outside the work team in the search for general unifying principles, and facilitate the development of the learner’s abilities to question and critique.Those who do not teach but have responsibility for the full curriculum and contribute to teaching and learning strategy in a school / faculty may potentially score A here.14. Knowledge & ExperienceCovers the relevant knowledge needed to carry out the role, however acquired, whether this is technical, professional or specialist. This may include the need to have sufficient experience to carry out basic, day-today responsibilities; have a breadth or depth of experience to act as a point of reference for others; and to act as a leading authority in one’s field or discipline.Question 50Select the response which, in its entirety, best reflects the evidence.Guidance: Knowledge acquired through education and qualifications is covered here, as well as that acquired through experience.All forms of knowledge, experience, and qualifications should be considered here, including academic awards, General and National Vocational Qualifications, OCR, BTEC, City and Guilds certificates, diplomas, and professional qualifications.It is the knowledge and experience required for the role that should be scored here, not the experience and qualifications that the role holder may possess.SINGLE Response TableSelect one of the responses below which, in its entirety, best reflects the evidence:A maximum of 80 pointsResponse A Is the role holder required to: › be a leading authority in their subject or profession with widespread professional or public recognition? Guidance: Used for those roles whose holders are required to be held in high esteem by others for the effective performance of the role.This level of knowledge is not common and is acquired as a result of significant experience.  The role holder typically is nationally or internationally renowned as a leading authority in a subject or specialism.  The role holder is widely acknowledged within their profession or specialism as a leader in the field and is required to maintain this position. Examples: 1. The provision of advice and opinion as a leading authority, nationally or internationally2. Academic leadership within a significant specialism at national or international level.Response B Is the role holder required to: › be recognised as an authority in their field or specialism within the organisation or amongst external peers, based on demonstrated expertise; › shape and influence developments within the organisation through their own contribution to their area of expertise?Guidance: Used for those roles whose holders need to be regarded as an authority in their field or specialism within the organisation or amongst external peers.  The holder is required to have specialist expertise sufficient to challenge or lead thinking.  The role holder is required to provide guidance or opinion, and to act as a source of expertise.  This level of knowledge is generally acquired after extensive experience following formal qualification and is recognised by professional or public acclaim.   The role holder will be expected to reflect on practice and engage in continuous professional development activities to keep their knowledge base and skills up to date, to develop them further and to contribute to the extension of understanding in the specialist area. It is unlikely that any area will have more than one role holder scoring at this level for the specific area of expertise.Examples:1. Leading the teaching of a discipline or a significant area of research2. Providing leading expertise in the area within the organisation and providing strategic level or professional advice.Response C Is the role holder required to: › apply a breadth or depth of experience showing full working knowledge and proficiency of their own area of expertise;› act as a point of reference to others; › demonstrate continuous specialist development, acquiring and refining skills and expertise in new or related areas through undertaking and encouraging internal or external development activity?Guidance: Applies to those roles where the holder is required to possess specialist or professional knowledge of general principles and to act as a point of reference to others in their area of expertise.  The role holder will be expected to reflect on practice and engage in continuous professional development activities to keep their knowledge base and skills up to date and to develop them further.Examples: 1. Having sufficient knowledge or expertise to be approached by others for advice or guidance in the specific area2. Having sufficient expertise to deliver lectures or write authoritative material in a broad subject area3. Conducting an academic research project or being responsible for an industrial or in-company contract with the minimum amount of supervisionOften this level of knowledge is acquired after a period of prolonged study or possession of relevant experience.  Response D Is the role holder required to: › apply working knowledge of theory and practice, sharing this knowledge with others as appropriate; › demonstrate continuous specialist development by acquiring relevant skills and competencies?Guidance: Applies to those roles requiring some knowledge of professional or technical practice and who share this knowledge with others as appropriate.This level of knowledge is often demonstrated by the acquisition of a certificate after a period of practical and theoretical training or experience of the role.  There may be a need for the role holder to keep their skills and competencies up to date by undergoing periodic refreshers and updating their training.Examples:1. The ability to interpret rules, procedures and regulations and provide advice to others on how they should be applied2. Knowledge and use of trade-specific regulations3. First level management or supervisory skills4. The ability to use a piece of complex scientific or electronic equipment, know how it works and when it is appropriate to use itResponse E Is the role holder required to: › have sufficient knowledge or expertise to work on day-to-day issues in their own area without direct or continuous reference to others? Guidance:Describes those requiring the level of knowledge typically acquired following a short period of practical training and may include some elementary or introductory study. Role holders can work on day-to-day issues without needing to refer to others for advice.Examples:1. Undertaking cleaning tasks in a designated area with a variety of equipment and materials without supervision2. Understanding the use of an established practice, procedure or techniques3. The ability to set up basic laboratory equipment and follow simple analytical procedures4. The ability to operate safely and properly an electrical drill, a switchboard or buffer machineResponse F Is the role holder required to: › be aware of basic principles and practices; › have an understanding of the systems and procedures which directly impact on their own work and be supervised or work closely with colleagues that the role holder can turn to for support?Guidance: Refers to those roles that require a basic level of knowledge of how to carry out the role. This will typically be acquired through practice. Role holders will generally be closely supervised.